---
layout: post
title: "Django"
description: "Notes on Django."
toc: true
comments: false
# image: 
hide: true
search_exclude: false
show_tags: true
# sticky_rank: 1
categories: [web-development]
permalink: /django
---

# Django

## Models
A **model** is the single, definitive source of information, i.e. the essential fields and behaviors of data, that usually maps to a single database table. Each model is a subclass of `django.db.models.Model`, and each attribute represents a database field.

```python
# myproject/myapp/models.py
from django.db import models

class Person(models.Model):
    first_name = models.CharField(max_length=30)
    last_name = models.CharField(max_length=30)
```

To make changes to models:
1. Change models in `models.py`
1. Run `manage.py makemigrations` to store changes as a *migration* file
1. Run `manage.py migrate` to apply changes to the database

Run `manage.py sqlmigrate myapp <migration-name>` to see the SQL command Django will apply.
```sql
-- using PostgreSQL backend
-- table name is derived automatically
CREATE TABLE myapp_person (
    "id" serial NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY, -- added automatically
    "first_name" varchar(30) NOT NULL,
    "last_name" varchar(30) NOT NULL
);
```

To use models, need to add the app to the project settings and run `manage.py migrate`.
```python
# project/settings.py
INSTALLED_APPS = [
    'myapp', #...
]
```

## Fields
The **field** of a model is required, maps to the columns of a database table, and are specified by class attributes of their corresponding `Model` class.

```python
from django.db import models

class Musician(models.Model):
    first_name = models.CharField(max_length=50)
    last_name = models.CharField(max_length=50)
    instrument = models.CharField(max_length=100)

class Album(models.Model):
    artist = models.ForeignKey(Musician on_delete=models.CASCADE)
    name = models.CharField(max_length=100)
    release_date = models.DateField()
    num_stars = models.IntegerField()
```

Each field should have their type specified by the appropriate `Field` class. The column type tells the database what kind of data to store, the default HTML widget when rendering form fields, and the minimum validation requirements for Django administration. Each field can also take field-specific arguments.
* The `null` boolean argument specifies if empty values are stored as `NULL` in the database.
* The `blank` boolean argument specifies if the field can be blank.
* The `choices` sequence of 2-tuples argument gives possible choices for a form widget. The first element is the value stored in the database, and the second element is displayed in the form widget, e.g. `('FR', 'Freshman')`. Use `<model>.get_<field>_display()` to access the choices of a model's field.
* The `default` argument specifies the default value or callable object called when a new object is created.
* The `help_text` argument specifies extra help text on the form widget.
* The `primary_key` boolean argument specifies the read-only, primary key field of the model.
    * If not specified, an `id = models.BigAutoField(primary_key=True)` will be automatically added as a primary key.
* The `unique` boolean argument specifies if the field must be unique throughout the table.
* Each Field also takes a verbose name as an optional, first argument. If not specified, the attribute name will be converted to the field's attribute name, e.g. `first_name` becomes "first name".
    * `ForeignKey`, `ManytoManyField`, and `OneToOneField` use `verbose_name` keyword argument.

```python
from django.db import models

class Person(models.Model):
    SHIRT_SIZES = (
        ('S', 'Small'),
        ('M', 'Medium'),
        ('L', 'Large'),
    )
    name = models.CharField(max_length=60, primary_key=True)
    shirt_size = models.CharField(max_length=1, choices=SHIRT_SIZES)

p = Person(name="Nathan", shirt_size="L")
p.save()
p.shirt_size # attribute: 'L'
p.get_shirt_size_display() # choice: 'Large'
```

## Relationships
A **relationship** specifies how models relate to each other, like how tables relate to each other in a relational database.
* **Many-to-One**: Use `django.db.models.ForeignKey` to specify the "one" model to which the "many" model is related. E.g. Many Cars relate to one Manufacturer, so the Car model class includes `manufacturer = models.ForeignKey(Manufacturer, on_delete=models.CASCADE)`.
* **Many-to-Many**: Use `django.db.models.ManyToManyField`to specify the "many" model to which "many" model is related. E.g. Many Pizzas relate to Many Toppings, so any one of the two models can include `models.ManyToManyField(...)`.
* Intermediate models relating two other models with two foreign keys can be used to include edge attributes.
    * Use `add()`, `create()`, or `set()` to create relationships, with a dictionary of required fields as `through_defaults` argument.
    * Use `remove()` to remove all matching `(model1, model2)` instances from the intermediate model.
    * Use `clear()` to remove all many-to-many relationships.
* **One-to-One**: Use `django.db.models.OneToOneField` to specify "one" model to which the "one" model is related, often used on the primary key of an object when that object "extends" another object in some way. E.g. In a database of Places (names, addresses, phone numbers), use a one-to-one field with a Restaurant model to specify which places are restaurants, rather than repeat Place data in the Restaurant model.

## Model Metadata
The `Meta` class gives a model optional metadata, or anything that's not a field. E.g. ordering of fields, database table name, verbose singular and plural names, etc.

## Model Attributes
The most important attribute of a model is the `Manager`, which is named `objects` by default, and it is used for table-wide queries to retrieve instances from the database.

## Model Methods
Use custom methods to add row-level functionality to models. The `@property` decorator can be used for model properties.

## Model inheritance
* Use *Abstract base classes* when needing a parent class to hold information of the child model.
* Use *Multi-table inheritance* when subclassing an existing model and want each model to have its own database table.
* Use *Proxy models* when modifying Python-level behavior of a model without changing the model's fields in any way.

## References
[^1]: Footnote