---
layout: post
title: "CS 61A: Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs"
description: "Course notes from UCB CS 61A, Fall 2021."
toc: true
comments: false
hide: false
search_exclude: false
show_tags: true
categories: [course-notes, computer-science]
permalink: /ucb-cs61a
---

## Course Resources
* Professor John DeNero
* [Course Lectures](https://www.youtube.com/c/JohnDeNero/playlists)
* [Course Website](https://inst.eecs.berkeley.edu/~cs61a/fa21/)
* [Course Syllabus](https://inst.eecs.berkeley.edu/~cs61a/fa21/articles/about/)
* Course Textbook: [Composing Programs](https://composingprograms.com/)
* Course focuses on a general introduction to programming concepts.
* Topics: Functions, Recursion, Abstraction, Iterators, Generators, Object-Oriented Programming, Scheme, Interpreters, Regular Expressions, Backus-Naur Form, SQL


## 1. Functions

* An **expression** describes a computation and evaluates to a value, with function call notation $f(x)$ being the most general form.
    * Primitive expressions: number, name, or string
    * Call expressions: operator and operands
* A **call expression** consists of an operator and operands, which are also expressions.
    * The evaluation procedure for a call expression is applied repeatedly by the programming language.
        1. Evaluate the operator, and then evaluate the operand subexpressions.
        1. **Apply** the **function** that is the value of the operator subexpression to the **arguments** that are the values of the operand subexpression.
* **Names** are set to expressions through **assignment**, e.g. `radius = 10`.
    * Note that assignment statements are evaluated once, e.g. `area = pi * radius ** 2` will not update when `radius` is changed at a later point.
* **Functions** can be defined using the `def` keyword, e.g.
    ```python
    def square(x):
        return x * x

    def sum_squares(x, y):
        return square(x) + square(y)
    ```
    * Note that the return values for functions is re-evaluated every time the function is called. 

* **Environment diagrams** visualize the interpreter's process, using code and frames.
    * Code shows statements and expressions, and arrows are used to indicate evaluation order.
    * Frames show the values bound to each name, which cannot be repeated within a frame.

* **Assignment statements** change the bindings between names and values within a frame.
    * The execution rule for assignment statements describes how names are bound to values.
        1. Evaluate all expression to the right of `=`, from left to right.
        1. Bind all names to the left of `=` to the resulting values, in the current frame.

* Similar to the abstraction of how assignment statements bind names to values, **function definitions** bind names to expressions.
    ```python
    def <name>(<formal parameters>):
            return <return expression>
    ```
    * The function signature indicates how many arguments a function takes.
    * The functino body defines the computational process expressed by a function.
    * Execution procedure for `def` statements:
        1. Create a function with signature `<name>(<formal parameters>)`.
        1. Set the body of that function ot be everything indented after the first line, without execution.
        1. Bind `<name>` to that function in the current frame.

* The execution order of calling/applying user-defined functions.
    1. Add a local frame, forming a *new environment*. The function frame tells the interpreter how to set up the frame.
    1. Bind the function's formal parameters to its arguments in that frame.
    1. Execute the body of the function in that new environment.
    1. The local frame is discarded after the function returns.

* Every expression is evaluated in the context of an environment, either a global frame or a local frame, followed by the global frame.
    * An environment is a sequence of frames, a series of names bound to values.
    * A name evaluates to the value bound to that name in the earliest frame of the current environment in which that name is found, i.e. from local to global frames.
